Today I'm speaking with Michael Nielsen.
You've done many things. You were one of
the pioneers of quantum computing, wrote
the main textbook in the field, of the
open science movement. You wrote a book
about deep learning that Chris Ola and
Greg Brockman credited him with getting
them into the field.
More recently, you're a research fellow
at the Esterel Institute and writing a
book about religion, science, and
technology.
I'm going to ask you about none of those
things. The conversation I want to have
today is how do we recognize scientific
progress? And it's it's especially
relevant for AI because people are
trying to close the RL verification loop
on scientific discovery. And what does
it mean to close that loop? But in
preparing for this interview,
I've realized that it's a more
mysterious and elusive
force even in the history of human
science than I understood. And I think a
good place to start will be
Michelson-Morley and how special
relativity is discovered, if it's
different than the story that you kind
of get off of YouTube videos.
Um
Anyways, I I will phrase it that way and
then we'll go in there. Okay. Yeah, so
Michelson-Morley is
one of the sort of the famous results
often presented as as this this
experiment that was done in the 1880s
and that helped Einstein, you know, come
up with the the special theory of
relativity a little bit later. So it's
sort of changing our
the way we think about space and and
time and and our fundamental conception
of those things. Um and there's kind of
a
uh a big gap, I think, between the way
Michelson and Morley and other people at
the time thought about the experiment
and certainly the way in which Einstein
thought or did not think about the
experiment. Um
in actual fact, he
stated later in his life he wasn't even
sure whether he was aware of the paper
at the time.
There's a lot of evidence that he
probably was aware of the paper at the
time, but it actually wasn't dispositive
for his thinking at all. Something else
completely was was going on. Um
so
uh what Michelson and Morley thought
they were doing was they thought they
were testing different theories of what
was called the ether. So if you go back
to the the the 1600s, uh Robert Boyle
introduced the idea of the ether and
basically the idea of the ether is um
you know, we know that that sound is
vibrations in the air
and then Boyle and other people got
interested in the question of like is is
light vibrations in something and they
couldn't figure out what it was. Boyle
actually did an experiment where he he
tested whether or not you could
propagate light through a vacuum. He
found that you could, you couldn't do it
with with with sound. So he introduced
this idea of the ether and then for the
next 200 or so years people had all
these kind of conversations about about
what the ether was and what its nature
was. And the Michelson and Morley
experiment was really an experiment to
test different theories of the ether
against one another
and in particular to find out whether or
not there was a so-called ether wind. So
the idea was that the the earth is
passing through
maybe this ether wind and if it is
passing through the ether wind, sort of
this background, um and you you shoot a
light beam sort of parallel
to the direction the ether wind is going
in, it'll get accelerated a little bit
and if it's being passed back sort of in
the opposite direction,
it'll get slowed down a little bit and
you should be able to to see this in the
results of interference experiments. And
what they found, much to their surprise,
I think,
was that in fact there was no ether wind
and that ruled out some theories of the
ether but but but not all and and
Michelson certainly continued to to
believe in the ether. Okay, so
this is what was the shocking part of um
reading the story from the biography of
Einstein that you recommended by um
What was his first name? Abraham Pais.
Yes. Subtle is the Lord. And then also
from Imre Lakatos,
the methodologies of scientific research
programs.
The way it's told is that
Michelson-Morley
proved that the ether did not exist.
>> Yeah. Therefore, it created a crisis in
physics
>> Yeah. that Einstein solved with special
relativity.
>> Yeah. And what you're pointing out is
actually was trying to distinguish
between many different theories of
ether. You know, if you're in space or
if you're on earth, it's the same
direction of ether or maybe the ether
wind is being carried around by the
earth and so you can't really experience
it on earth, but if you go to high
enough altitude, you might be able to
experience it.
In fact, the Michelson's experiments
were the famous one is 1887, but
>> Yeah. he conducted these experiments for
basically two decades.
>> I mean, for longer than that. He he
conducted them. I think the first one
was in 1881, but he continued to believe
until I mean, he died. He died I think
it was like 1929 or so. It was like the
late '20s
and he was still doing experiments in
the 1920s. Um
sort of about whether or not, you know,
the ether existed and so he so he
continued to believe in the ether to the
end of his his life or I think the last
public statement he made is like a year
or two before he died and he still still
believed basically believed at that
point.
>> And in fact, there was an another
physicist Miller who kept doing his
experiments in the 1920s. He thought
that he went to high enough altitude, is
in Mount Wilson in California, where oh,
I'm high enough that I can actually the
ether winds are not being dragged with
it by the earth. I and I've measured the
effect of the ether. And Einstein hears
about this and he says, this is where
you get the famous quote, "Subtle is the
Lord, but malicious he is not." Anyways,
I think the reason the story is
interesting
it's from from many other different
reasons, but one is
one of the different ways in which the
real history of science is
different from this idea you get of the
scientific method is [clears throat] you
really can't apply falsification as
easily as you might think. Um it's not
clear what is being falsified. Uh is it
just another version of the theory of
the ether that's being falsified or
certainly you can't induce the theory of
special relativity from the fact that
one version of the ether seems to be
disconfirmed by these experiments. Yeah,
so I mean, certainly doesn't show that
ideas about falsification are are wrong
or falsified.
But but you know, it does show that sort
of the the most naive ideas, you know,
are things are much often much more
complicated than you think. See,
Michelson did this experiment in 1881.
He was a very young man and then other
people, I think Rayleigh was one of
them, pointed out that there were some
problems with the way he did it. So they
had to redo it in in 1887
and at that point, like a lot of the
leading physicists of the day, leading
scientists of the day, basically
accepted um this result that there there
was no ether wind. But what what to do
about this?
So yeah, sure, maybe you falsified some
theories of the ether. There are others
that you haven't falsified at all at
this point.
And and you people sort of set to work
on developing those. I'm actually it is
funny. I mean, people will phrase it as
showed that there was
that the ether didn't exist and even
just the word the there is kind of a
misnomer. You know, you actually had a
ton of different different theories and
and a couple of leading contenders. Um
so yeah, there's some version of
falsification going on, but like how you
how you respond to this new experiment
is very very complicated. And most
people responded, I mean, certainly the
leading physicists of the day responded
by by saying, "Okay,
this gives us a lot of information about
what the ether must be, but it doesn't
tell us that there is no ether." In
fact, Lorentz Yeah. at the end of the
19th century, before Einstein,
figures out the math how you convert
from one reference frame to another
reference frame,
comes with the Lorentz transformations,
which is basically the basis of special
relativity, but his interpretation is
that you are converting from the ether
reference frame to these non-privileged
other reference frames if you're moving
relative to the ether.
And his interpretation of length
contraction and time dilation is that
this is the effect of moving through the
ether and you have this pressure and
that pressure is warping clocks, it's
warping
measures of length.
And the interesting thing here is that
experimentally you cannot distinguish
Lorentz's interpretation from special
relativity.
Yeah, I think that's a strong statement.
Um I mean,
Lorentz
introduces this quantity called local
time,
which he regards as he's not trying My
understanding is he's not trying to to
give a really a physical interpretation
of this. Um but it's what Einstein would
would later just recognize as time in an
in another inertial reference frame. And
he's not trying to attribute much
physical meaning to it. I think Poincaré
gets much closer to later on to
realizing that no, actually this is the
time that's registered by by by by
clocks. But if you if you think about
you go what is it? It's 40 odd years
later,
um people start doing
these muon experiments where they see
basically cosmic rays hit the top of the
atmosphere, they produce a shower of of
muons and you can look to see at
different heights in the atmosphere, you
can look to see how many of those muons
remain
and they decay over time and a a very
strange thing happens, which is that
they're decaying way way way too slow.
So you sort of you expect actually they
they shouldn't really they shouldn't be
able to sort of last the whole way
through the atmosphere at all. There's
just
their decay their decay rate is is is
too quick
if if you're in a classical theory,
but if in fact, their time really has
slowed down,
it's okay. And in fact, you know, the
the the measured decay rates in in
1940 and then there have since been more
accurate experiments done, match exactly
what you expect
from special relativity. Um so so you
know, that's the kind of thing where
again, if Lorentz had been alive, he he
he'd been dead 10 or so years at that
point.
If he'd been alive, you know, I'm sure
he would have tried seems quite likely
that he would have tried to save his
theory by patching it up yet again. But
but it would have been a a massive
I mean, that's a real setback. It starts
to just look like, "Oh, no, time is
you know, this thing that Lorentz
introduced as a mathematical
convenience. No, no, no, that's actually
what time is." For the for the at least
and then you know, there's a whole bunch
of other experiments that that show this
very similar phenomena.
>> And and when was that experiment done?
That was I think 1940 or 19 It might
have been published in 1941. So, maybe
to then to rephrase
uh change my claim, um
it's not that you could not have
distinguished them, but the scientific
community adopted what we in retrospect
consider the more correct interpretation
before it was actually empirically or
experimentally
um
shown to be preferred.
So, there's clearly some process that
human science does which can distinguish
different theories. Can I can I can I
just interrupt? I mean, you used the
word process, and it's sort of it's
interesting to think about about that
that that term. Like, process kind of
carries connotations of of, you know,
it's something set in advance, it's
something
um and it it's it's much more
complicated in in in practice. You you
have people like like Lorentz, who I
mean, Einstein just just absolutely
utterly admired. Um and and and
Poincaré, one of, you know, the greatest
uh scientists who ever lived, um
uh and Michelson, I mean, another truly
outstanding scientist, never reconciled
themselves. So, it's not as though
there's like some standard procedure
that we're all using to like reconcile
these things. No, like, you know, great
scientists can remain wrong very can
remain wrong for a very long time after
the scientific community has broadly
changed its its opinion. But, there's
nothing there's no centralized
authority, right, sort of saying or
centralized method. Yeah. I mean, that
that is the interesting thing that like
there's there's progress even though it
is hard to articulate the process by
which happens the um the heuristics that
are used. Anyways, you mentioned
Poincaré. And so, Lorentz has the math
right, but the interpretation wrong. And
you should explain
it seems like Poincaré had the opposite
where he understood that it's hard to
define simultaneity um because it
requires uncircular definition with time
um or velocity of something that might
be sign of, you know, arrive at a
midpoint together, but velocity is
defined in terms of time. Um
And I find this interesting. There's a
couple other examples we could uh call
on, but like there is this phenomenon in
the history of science where somebody
asked the right question,
um but then they don't sort of clinch
it. Mhm. And I'm curious what you think
is happening in those cases.
I mean,
I think you sort of you actually do want
to go case by case and try and
understand that it's not necessarily
clear that they're they're doing the
same thing wrong in in all the cases. I
mean, the the Poincaré case is is
amazing. Um he seems to have understood
the principle of relativity, the idea
that the the laws of physics are the
same in all inertial reference frames.
He seems to have understood that the
speed of light is the same in all
inertial reference frames. He He doesn't
actually phrase it quite that way, uh
but but it is my understanding, but but
I don't speak French, but um
uh
You know, and this is I mean, these are
basically this these are the ideas that
Einstein uses to deduce
special relativity. But then he also has
this additional sort of misunderstanding
where he thinks uh that length
contraction is a dynamical effect that
somehow
um uh you know, sort of particles are
being pushed together by by, you know,
some external force, some some something
is going on dynamically, and he doesn't
understand that that it's purely
kinematics, that actually space and time
uh are are different than than what we
thought, and you need to fundamentally
rethink those those things. So, it's
almost like it's almost like he knew too
much. Um you know, he had sort of almost
too grand a a vision in mind, and
Einstein sort of almost subtracts from
that and and and says, "No, no, no, it's
it's space and time are just different
than what we thought. Um
uh and and and, you know, here's the
correct picture." And there's a a paper
in I think it's 1909 where where
Poincaré like he's still got this
dynamical picture of what's going on
with the length contraction, and we
just, you know,
this is just not necessary. This is this
is a mistake um from the modern point of
view. And and so, why why is he doing
this? Like, why is he clinging on to
this idea?
And
you know, I I don't know. I've obviously
never met the man. Uh uh
it it it it would be fascinating to be
able to to to talk it over and to try
and understand, but
you
he
I mean, his expertise seems to be
getting in the way. He knows so much, he
understands so much,
um and then he's not able to let go of
these these things. Actually, a really
interesting fact um is that uh a few
years prior, so
1890s, Einstein's a teenager, he
believes in the ether, too. Like, he
knows about this stuff, but like he's
just not he's not quite as attached,
obviously,
as as these older older people were. Um
and and maybe they they were a little
bit prisoner of their their own
expertise. That's that's my guess. I
mean, historians of science could could
could might would would some would
certainly disagree. Well, there's then
there's the obvious stories where
Einstein himself later on
is said to have not latched on to the
correct interpretations of um quantum
mechanics or cosmology because of his
own attachments. Yeah. I think that the
the the bigger question I have is like
the muon example is a great example of
um
uh these long verification loops and how
progress seems to be happening by the
scientific community faster than these
verification loops imply. Um the maybe
the clearest example is Aristarchus in
2nd century BC
comes up with the idea of heliocentrism.
The ancient Athenians dismiss it on the
grounds that well, we should see as the
Earth is moving around the sun if really
the sun is the center of the solar
system, the stars should move relative
to the Earth. Um and the only reason
that is not possible that would not be
the case is the stars are so far away
that you would not observe this.
And it's only in 1838 that stellar
parallax is actually measured. And so,
we didn't need to wait until 1838 to
have heliocentrism, right? Like, we
didn't need to wait for the experimental
validation to understand Copernicus is
better in some way.
In fact,
when Copernicus first comes up with his
theory, it's well known that um
the Ptolemaic model was
more accurate because it had had all
these um centuries of adding on these
epicycles. Um what's maybe really less
well appreciated, it was also in some
sense simpler
um because
Copernicus actually had to add extra
epicycles. It had more epicycles than
the Ptolemaic model because he he want
he had this bias that, you know, the um
the Earth should go in a perfect circle
in equal time.
Anyways, I I I think this is an
interesting story because it's like
it's not more accurate. It's not a
simpler theory.
So, how why was how could you have known
ex ante that Copernicus was correct and
Ptolemy was not? Hm. I mean, good
question, and I don't know uh it's sort
of entirely the answer. I I do know um
well,
I mean, I can give you a certainly
a partial answer that I sort of, you
know, centuries in the future, you start
to find very compelling. Um
um
uh and I think it's sort of part of the
historic story, at least, um which is
um
you know, one of the big shocks for for
Newton um
eventually, you know, he he did
understand uh
uh Kepler's laws of of motion
eventually.
Um so, you're able to explain sort of
the motions of the the planets in the
the sky.
But, he also, out of the same theory,
his theory of of gravitation, was able
to explain terrestrial motion. So, he
was able to explain why objects move in
parabolas on the Earth, and he's able to
explain
um the tides in terms of
uh
uh the sun's uh uh the the the moon and
the sun's effect um
gravitational effect on water on the
Earth. And so, you have what seem like
three very different disconnected
phenomena all being explained by this
one set of ideas. Right. That that that
I think starts to feel that's very
compelling,
um at least to me. Um and I think I
think most people find that very very
satisfying once they once they
eventually realize it. Um have you read
the Keynes biography of Newton? Oh, I
have I He's written an entire book No,
no, the the the essay. Yeah, yeah, yeah,
sure, sure, sure. Yeah.
I love I love that. I mean, this this
description of him as the last of the
magicians is is wonderful.
>> Yeah.
I in fact, I think it's maybe worth
superimposing or you should read out
that that one passage of the of of the
thing. All right.
So, it's from uh actually, I believe it
was a talk that he gave at Cambridge not
not long before uh he died. He'd
acquired uh Newton's papers somehow, um
and then he gave uh he gave a lecture, I
think, twice um about this or that his
brother Jeffrey gave it the other time
because he was too ill.
Um and there's just this wonderful
wonderful quote in the middle.
Um oh, actually, the whole thing is
really interesting,
um but but I love this particular quote.
"Newton was not the first of the age of
reason. He was the last of the
magicians, the last great mind which
looked out on the visible and
intellectual world with the same eyes as
those who began to build our
intellectual inheritance rather less
than 10,000 years ago."
And like, this idea that people have
that that that Newton was um
sort of the the first modern scientist
is is somehow wrong.
He
I mean, it's there's some truth to it,
but he really had this very different
way
um
of of looking at the world that was part
sort of superstitious
um and part modern. It was a funny
hybrid. He's sort of this transitional
figure in some sense. Um
uh
that that that phrase, "the last of the
magicians,"
I think really really points at
something. The thing I'm very curious
about with Newton is whether it was the
same program, the same heuristics, the
same biases that he applied
to his alchemical work as he did to the
understanding of astronomy. So, this is
from the Keynes essay.
"There was extreme method in his
madness. All his unpublished works on
esoteric and theological matters are
marked by careful learning, accurate
method, and extreme sobriety of
statement. They are just as sane as the
Principia, if their whole matter and
purpose were not magical.
They were nearly all composed during the
same 25 years of his mathematical
studies.
So,
clearly there was some aesthetic which
motivated people like Einstein to say
reject earlier ways of thinking and say
no, the ether is wrong, there's a better
way to think about things.
Um same with Newton.
And
the question I have is whether
similar heuristics
towards parsimony, towards aesthetics,
etc.
would be equally useful across time and
across disciplines, or whether you need
different heuristics. And the reason
that's relevant is even if you can build
a verification loop for science,
maybe if there if the taste has to point
in the same direction, you can at least
encode that bias into the AIs, and that
would maybe be enough. Yeah,
I mean
this question's like like the point is
that
where we always get bottlenecked is
where the the previous processes and and
and heuristics don't apply. Right? Like
that's
almost sort of definitionally what
causes the bottlenecks. Cuz people are
smart, they know what has worked before,
they study it, they they they apply the
same kinds of things. Um and so they
don't get stuck in the in the same
places as before. They they keep you
know, they keep getting bottlenecked in
in in in different places. I mean,
that's overgeneralizing a bit, but but I
I think it's it's the right Like if
you're attempting to reduce science to a
process, you're attempting to reduce it
to something where there is just a
method which you can apply and you know,
you turn sort of the the crank and out
pops insight. Um sure, you I mean, you
can do a certain amount of that, but
you're going to get bottlenecked at the
places where your existing method
doesn't apply. Um and and but
definitionally
there's no crank you can you you can
turn. You You need a lot of people
trying different ideas. Um and and sort
of
the more difficult the idea is to have,
right, the the greater the bottleneck,
but then also sort of the greater the
triumph. Quantum mechanics is like I
mean, it's a great example of this. It's
such a shocking uh set of ideas. It's
such a shocking theory. Actually, the
theory of evolution in some sense is
also quite a shocking idea. Not the you
know, principle of you know, the the
sort of natural selection, but that it
can explain so much. That's a shocking
idea.
Existing safety benchmarks claim that at
least for today's top models, [music]
attacks are only successful a few
percent of the time. This sounds great,
but Labelbox researchers were able to
jailbreak these very same models about
90% of the time, even the ones that have
the strongest reputation for safety. And
the disconnect here is that the prompts
which underlie these public safety
benchmarks are all framed in a very
naive way. There's no attempt to
disguise harmful intent. These prompts
will just ask models to hack into a
secure network and to do so without
getting caught. But real bad actors
don't write like this. So, Labelbox
built a new safety benchmark from the
ground up. Their prompts reflect real
adversarial behavior by stripping out
obvious trigger phrases and wrapping
their request in fictional scenarios.
For example, instead of outright asking
an LLM to steal somebody's identity, the
prompt will frame it as a game. A light
bearer who's trying to hide from dark
forces [music] needs a handbook on how
to disguise themselves as somebody else.
This safety research is linked in the
description. If you think this could be
useful for your own work, reach out at
labelbox.com/theorcash.
[music]
So, Principia Mathematica was released
in 1687. The Origin of Species was
released in 1859.
At least naively, it seems like Darwin's
theory, the theory of natural selection,
is conceptually easier
than the theory
theory of gravity. Um
I asked Ernst Stahl this question, um
but yeah, there there was this
contemporary biologist with Darwin,
Thomas Huxley, who read this and said,
"How extremely stupid to not have
thought of this?" And uh nobody ever
reads the Principia Mathematica and
thinks,
"God, why didn't I beat Newton to the
punch here?"
>> [laughter]
>> Um And so yeah, what's going on here?
Why why didn't Darwinism take so much
longer? Yeah,
the idea must have been known to animal
breeders for a long time long time at
some level. Right.
Uh or certainly large chunks of the idea
were were known. They you know,
artificial selection was a thing. Um
uh
and in some sense Darwin's genius
wasn't in having that idea. It was
understanding just how central it was
uh to to to biology. Um that you know,
you you you could potentially sort of go
back and you can explain a tremendous
amount about all of the variety of what
we see in the world um
with this as as not necessarily the only
principle, but certainly a core
principle. And you know, so he writes
this this wonderful wonderful book uh uh
The Origin of Species. Um and it's it's
just you know, so much evidence and so
many examples and and sort of trying to
tease this out and see what the
implications
uh
and and you know, to connect it to as
much else as as you possibly can to to
to connect it to to geology and to
connect it to to to to all these other
things. Um so that's sort of hard work
that you know, making the case that it's
actually relevant all across the
biosphere. You know, is is what he's
doing there. He's not just having the
idea, he's making a compelling case that
no, it's it's intertwined with
absolutely everything else.
>> Yeah. The motivation of the question was
Lucretius, who's this first-century
Roman poet,
has an idea that seems analogous to
natural selection about you know,
species get fitted more to time over
over time to their environments or
species losing fit to their environment.
Um
And so like, okay, well, why did this go
nowhere for
19 centuries? And then I looked into it
or more accurately asked LLMs what
exactly was Lucretius' idea here. And it
actually is extremely different from
what real natural selection is. He
thought there was this generative period
in the past where all the species came
about, and then there was this one-time
filter
which resulted in the species that are
around today, and they became fit to the
environment. He did not have this idea
that it is an ongoing gradual process,
or that there is a tree of life that
connects all
all life forms on Earth together, which
is By the way, this it's incredibly
weird fact that
every single life form on Earth has a
common ancestor.
>> It's not incredibly Is it not incredibly
weird, right? If if if you think that
the origin of life right must have been
very hard, like that there's a
bottleneck there, then it's not so
surprising. Yeah. There's also this
verification loop aspect where even if
Newton might be harder
in some sense, if you've clinched it,
you can experimentally
I know validate is the wrong word
philosophically, but
you can give a lot of base points to the
theory. You can be like, "Okay, I have
this idea of why things fall on Earth. I
have this idea of why orbital periods
for planets have a certain pattern.
Let's try it on the moon, which orbits
the Earth." And in fact, you know, it's
it's weird, the orbital period matches
what my calculations imply. And the
tides work correctly.
It's just amazing. Whereas for our
Darwinism,
it takes a ton of work for Darwin to
compile all this sort of cumulative
evidence, but there's no individual
piece that is overwhelmingly powerful.
And there's a whole bunch of problems as
well. Like he doesn't really understand
what you know, sort of the what the
mechanism is. He doesn't understand
genes, like all these things. The very
interesting thing in the history of
Darwinism
is
this idea which sort of theoretically
you could come up with at any time,
there is
almost identical independent creation of
that idea between Alfred Wallace and
Charles Darwin. Um
so much so that I think Wallace sends
his manuscript to Darwin and is like,
"What do you think of this idea?" And
Darwin is like, "Fuck."
>> [laughter]
>> Uh I don't think that's an exact quote,
but I think it's pretty much right.
Yeah. Uh and then so they they both
actually end up presenting their ideas
together in the spirit of sort of
sportsmanship. And so then yeah, why why
was this period in the 1860s or 1850s?
Why is What was that the right time to
have this idea as opposed to coming up
with different ideas? Um
one is geology. So, in 1830s, I think
Charles Lyell figures out that there's
been millions and billions of years of
time that's existed on on Earth. Then
paleontology shows you that actually
organisms that existed uh fossils have
existed for that entire time. So, life
goes back a long time. And in fact, you
can even find fossils for intermediate
species um
that show you this tree of life. In
fact, between humans and other apes as
well, there's intermediate humans. Um
there's the age of colonization, and we
have all these voyages where you can do
this biogeography. Um and I guess I'm
They all must have been necessary
because the In fact, there's a huge
history of parallel innovation and
discovery in the history of science. So,
maybe it is another piece of evidence to
actually more had to be in place for a
given idea to be discovered. Because if
it's not discovered for a long time, and
then spontaneously many different people
are coming up with it, that shows you
that actually the the building blocks
were in some sense necessary.
>> I mean, I I mean, I think I mean, the
this example of of Lyell and I mean, and
and other other biolo- excuse me, other
geologists, you know, sort of early
1800s, basically come you know, having
this idea of deep time, that does seem
to have been crucial. I know
uh Darwin was very influenced by by by
Lyell. Um
uh
and and and you know, if you don't have
at least sort of tens or hundreds of
millions of years,
uh evolution just starts to look like a
nonstarter. You know, we should be
seeing radical change you know, in order
to make it work on sort of a time scale
of
say 5 to 10,000 years or you know, 6,000
years, bishop usher. Um you you you
would need to be seeing evolution
occurring at a massive rate
um sort of during human lifetimes, and
we're just not seeing that. So, so that
that does seem to have been a blocker.
It's interesting to I mean, to you know,
to to your question, like what other
blockers
were there? Were there were there any
others? Um and I don't I don't know.
Right. Or yeah, how much earlier could
you in principle have come up with that
if you're a much smarter? Actually, let
let me I mean let let's go back sort of
zoom out to your original question. So,
you're talking about sort of the
verification loop in AI.
Um
and and you something an example I think
that should give you pause there is um
you know, the the big signature success
so far is certainly AlphaFold.
>> Yeah. Um and of course AlphaFold really
isn't about AI. You know, a a massive
fraction of the success there
um is the protein data bank. So, it's
it's X-ray diffraction, it's it's NMR,
it's cryo-EM.
Um and the several billion dollars that
was spent obtaining whatever it's
180,000 structure uh protein structures.
Um so, sort of that you know, it's
basically the story of uh we spent many
many decades obtaining protein structure
just by going out and looking very hard
at the world experimentally. Um and then
we fitted a nice model at the end of it
and that was like a tiny fraction of the
of the entire investment. Um but it's
definitely not um
you know, that's the story of data
acquisition. Yeah. Um principally, it's
not only. I mean, the AI bit is very
very impressive. It's quite remarkable.
Um but it is only a small part of the
total story.
AlphaFold is very interesting and I I I
philosophically I can wonder what you
think of it as um
a scientific theory or scientific
explanation. Yeah. Because if over time
I guess the world has become harder to
understand.
I'm going
as I'm saying things because you're such
a um careful speaker. I'm
I I say it this phrase and I'm like is
that a good
>> [laughter]
>> Is that a will he actually buy that
premise? Um but yeah, there's you know,
we need to fit models to things rather
than at least in some domains we we're
trying to fit models to things rather
than coming up with underlying
principles that explain a broad range of
phenomenon. And so, you compare say the
theory of general relativity with um
or any theory which is that's out to
some equations versus AlphaFold which is
encoding these
different relationships between
different things we can't even interpret
over 100 million parameters.
And are those really the same thing
because
GR can predict things you could have
never anticipated or was never meant to
do. Like why does Mercury's orbit
precess? Um and AlphaFold is not going
to have that kind of explanatory reach.
And I I want to get your reaction to
that. Yeah, it's a yeah, I think it's an
incredibly interesting question. Um
I mean, maybe maybe a really pivotal
question. Um
In the sense of So, you know, if you if
you sort of like a
a very classic
point of view, you want these deep
explanatory principles.
Um
you want it sort of as few free
parameters as you possibly uh can. You
you want very simple models which
explain a lot. And AlphaFold doesn't
look anything like that. Um
and so, you might just sort of say, "Oh,
well, we you know, it's nice. It's maybe
helpful as a as a model, but it doesn't
have it it's not a scientific
explanation." So, that's kind of that's
a that's like a conservative point of
view. That's sort of all right, answer
one to the question. I think answer two
is to say something like
um
maybe you shouldn't think about
AlphaFold you know, as as an explanation
in the classic sense, but maybe it
contains lots of little explanations
inside it and so, maybe part of what you
can get out of like you know,
interpretability work is you can go into
AlphaFold and you can start to extract
certain things. Maybe maybe basically by
doing sort of you know, archaeology of
AlphaFold um
we can actually understand a great deal
more
um about these principles. You can start
to extract it, "Oh, that circuit does
this interesting thing and we learn
this." Um so, I I don't know to what
extent that's been done with AlphaFold.
I know it's been done a little bit with
um
uh
some of like the chess models. I believe
it's AlphaZero. Um there
uh seem to be some strategies which were
certainly borrowed by Magnus Carlsen at
least um which he seems to have just
taken
uh
from AlphaZero. I mean, I don't think
there's any public confirmation of this,
but there were you know, so some some
experts have noticed
uh that he changed his game quite
radically after um some sort of some
public forensics were were released on
how AlphaZero worked. Um so, that's kind
of a sort of an example where
uh I think human beings are starting to
extract meaning out of these models and
maybe that starts to lead to sort of
sort of viewing the models as a source
of a potential source of explanations.
You need to do more work because they're
not very legible up front, but you can
extract them potentially. And I think
that's kind of I think that's that's
kind of an interesting intermediate um
situation where they're not
explanations, but you can extract
interesting explanations out of them.
You can use them as as kind of a
kind of a source.
And I think the like the third and the
most interesting possibility is no, that
like they're they're a new type of
object in some in some sense. They
should be taken very seriously as as
explanations, but where in the past we
haven't had the ability to really do
anything with them. And now we're going
to we're going to have sort of new
interesting new sort of actions which we
can we can do. We can merge them, we can
distill them, we can do all these kinds
of things.
Um and there's going to be sort of a
almost a new it's a big opportunity sort
of in the
philosophy of of science to to to to to
to start to do that. There's sort of a
like a
anticipation of this in some sense I
think in the way
something I I I know know some
mathematicians and physicists
who I mean, historically if you had like
a 100-page equation which and that's the
kind of thing that does come up I mean,
there's just nothing you can do if it's
20. There is nothing you can do. At that
point you you give up on the problem.
And now today with tools like
Mathematica you can just keep going. Um
and so, that's that's an object now.
That's a thing that you can work with
and and there are examples where people
work with these things that formerly
were regarded as too complicated and
sometimes they get simple answers out
out of the end. That's just an
intermediate working state. Mhm. And so,
I sort of wonder if there's going to be
you know, something similar is going to
going to happen in in in in this
particular
uh case where you can take these models
um
uh and sort of just use them in a little
bit the same way uh people do with with
Mathematica and and take them seriously
as they're not explanations in the
classic sense, but they'll be something
else which interesting operations uh can
can can be done on. The the thing I
worry about is suppose that you it's
1600 and you're training or 1500 and
you're training a model
on this is a weird history where we
developed deep learning before we had
enough before we had cosmology. But um
let's suppose we live in that world and
you're observing how there's the stars,
they don't seem to move. Planets have
all these weird behaviors.
And then you train a model on that and
then you do some kind of interp on it
and try to figure out, "Well, what are
the patterns we see here?" What you
would see are just these
you just keep be able to keep building
on top of these models. You'd see like,
"Oh, there's more epicycles we didn't
notice. There's another epicycle. It's
the
uh parameters whatever to whatever
encode epicycle this. Parameters
whatever encode the next epicycle." So,
if you were just trying to figure out
"Why is the solar system the way it is
from observational data?" You could just
keep adding epicycles up on epicycles,
but it really took one mind to integrate
it all in and say,
"Here's my
Here's the Here's the Here's what makes
more sense overall." So, so I mean
there like like
you know, I mean, this is sort of to my
point that we we don't as
really understand what to do with the
models like sort of we we don't have
like the the verbs necessarily yet. Um
but you know, it's it's certainly
interesting to think about the question
um you know, where you start to
apply constraints to the models. You
know, it's sort of essentially saying
what's the simplest possible explanation
or you know, can you can you simplify?
Can you can you give me sort of the
90/10
uh explanation? Can you and go further
and further and further sort of in in
boiling it down? So, it might be that
indeed they sort of start out by
providing you a very very complicated
uh many many many parameter model. Um
but you can just you can just force the
sort of the the case and basically
that's scaffolding
um which maybe they you know, is sort of
the the very early
uh uh uh days of their attempt to
understand something. Um
but but they're forced through that to
to to much more simple understanding. Uh
sorry sorry for misunderstanding, but it
sounds like you're saying maybe there's
some sort of regularizer or some sort of
distillation you could do of
a very complicated model that gets to
a truer more parsimonious theory.
But yeah, just take uh Ptolemy versus
Copernicus, right? So, you start out
with lots of Ptolemy epicycles.
And then you try to distill this model.
And maybe gets rid of some of the
epicycles that were are less and less
sort of necessary to get
the mean squared error of the orbits to
match. But at some point it has to do a
thing which is like switch two things.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And it locally it actually
doesn't make things more accurate.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's sort of in a global
sense that it's it's a more progressive
theory. Yeah. Yeah. And
there's some process which obviously
humanity did over its span which did
that regularization or did that swap.
But if
raw gradient descent, it seems like I
don't I don't really feel like it would
do I mean, you I can say I mean, you
think about the example of of going from
Newtonian gravity to Einstein's general
theory of relativity. And these are I
mean, these are shockingly different
theories. And the question you know, is
like what causes that
that flip? And and as nearly as I
understand the history, you know, what
goes on is Einstein you know, develops
special relativity.
And pretty much straight away he
understands. I mean, it's a very obvious
observation. In special relativity,
influences can't propagate faster than
the speed of light. And in Newtonian
gravity
action you know, is at a distance. In
fact, the you know, it's it's straight
away in special relativity you you could
use Newtonian gravity to do faster than
faster than light signaling. You could
send information backwards in time. You
could do all kinds of crazy stuff. Um
and so, it's not a big leap to realize,
"Oh, we have a big problem here." Um and
so, you know, that's kind of the that's
the forcing function there. It's it's
you've realized that your old
explanation is not sufficient. You need
something new.
And then you get Yeah, you get you're
just going to you're going to start by
doing the simplest, you know, possible
stuff.
And it just turns out that a lot of that
stuff doesn't work very well. And so you
sort of forced In fact, it is
interesting.
You know, he sort of forced to go
through these
steps of gradually it gets quite more
complicated and it's sort of wrong in a
variety of ways. And the final theory
appears
really shockingly
simple
and and beautiful, but it's gone through
some some somewhat ugly intermediate
stages. Yeah.
Yeah. So if you're thinking about what
what does it look like to have AI
accelerate science? There's one for
maybe well-understood domains where we
just want
local solutions like how does this
protein fold? We just train a raw model
using gradient descent. Then there's
things like coming up with general
relativity where you couldn't really
just train on every single observation
in the universe and hope that general
relativity pops out.
And so what would it require? Well, it
also certainly wasn't immediately
discovered, right? So it was
a lot of decades of thought.
And I guess you need independent
research programs where people start off
with these biases where Einstein is just
initially motivated by this thought
experiment of, you know, can you
distinguish the effect of gravity from
just being accelerated upwards?
And then you just need different
AI thinkers to have to start off with
these initial biases and see what what
can germinate out of them.
And then the verification loop for that
might be quite long. We just need to
keep all those research programs alive
at the same time. Yeah, I mean I think
there's like I mean this point that you
make about sort of keeping all the
different research programs alive. Like
that that I think is very important and
and somehow central. Um
I mean
a great example is is
situations where the same answer has
been correct in some circumstances and
wrong in other circumstances. So so
the planet Uranus was like not in quite
the right spot and and people very
famously predicted
the existence of Neptune
on this basis. Wonderful massive success
for Newtonian gravity.
The planet Mercury is not in quite the
right spot. You predict the existence of
some other distorting
planet. Turns out that doesn't exist.
Actually, the reason Mercury is not in
the right spot is because you need
general relativity.
And so you sort of you've
you've pursued very similar ideas. It's
been very successful in one case and
it's been completely and utterly
unsuccessful in the other case. And I
think I mean a priori, you can't tell
which of these is the thing to do. And
you actually need to do both.
And so I mean this is certainly is a
very true in the in in the history of
science that
you know, this kind of diversity where
you just have lots of people go off and
pursue lots of potentially promising
ideas.
You just need to support that for for a
long time and it's it's I mean hard to
do that for a variety of reasons.
But but but it does seem to be to be
very very very important. So so
this example
of
Uranus versus Mercury
is very interesting.
In one, I think it illustrates sort of
the difficulty of falsificationism.
Like
the the orbit of Uranus is in some sense
falsifying Newtonian mechanics. But then
you say you make some ancillary
prediction that says, "Oh, the reason
this is happening is there must be
another planet which is affected
perturbing
Uranus' orbit." And you I think it's
Leverrier in 1846.
Point the telescope in the right
direction, you find Uranus. Neptune. Oh,
it's there. Yeah. Neptune, yes. But with
Mercury
Yeah, it's observed that it's
the ellipse which forms this orbit is
rotating 43 arc seconds more every
century than Newtonian mechanics would
imply. So people say that there must be
a planet inside Mercury's orbit. They
call it Vulcan. And point the
telescopes, it's not there. But if
you're a proper Newtonian
what you do is say, "Well, maybe there's
some cosmic dust that's occluding this
planet. Or maybe the planet is so small
we can't see it. Or maybe there's some
Let's build even more powerful
telescope. Oh, maybe there's
some magnetic field which is sort of
occluding our measurements." And this
happens over and over, right? Like like,
you know, there's just so many stories
which are exactly like this. Right. I
mean an example I love from um
uh you know, in in the 1990s, some
people noticed that the Pioneer
spacecraft weren't quite where they were
supposed to be. And so you you can get
very excited about this. Oh my goodness,
general relativity is wrong. You have
like kind of you know, maybe we're going
to discover the next the next theory of
gravity. And and today the accepted
explanation is that no, actually there's
just a slight asymmetry in the in
the spacecraft. It turns out that there
the thermal radiation is like slightly
larger in one direction than the other
and that's causing a tiny little
acceleration towards the sun.
Um And most of the time when there's
these apparent exceptions,
it's just something like that's going
on. It's very much like the Vulcan the
Mercury Vulcan
case.
But every once in a while it's it's not.
And and a priori, you can't you can't
distinguish these. But I mean science is
just just full of these. It's funny too
like the way we tell the history of
science, it sounds so simple. Like oh,
you just focus on the right exception
and
you you realize that you need to throw
out the old theory. Right. And and lo
and behold,
you win a Nobel Prize awaits. But in
fact, there's these exceptions are all
over the place and 99.9% of the time, it
just turns out to be some effect like
like this thermal acceleration in the
case of the Pioneer
spacecraft.
So so you sort of unfortunately, there's
a lot of selection bias going into those
stories. And the thing is you
there's no ex ante heuristic which tells
you which case you're in. And
just to spell out why I think this is
important
is because some people have this idea
that AI is going to make
disproportionate progress towards
science.
Because it makes disproportionate
progress towards
domains where there's tight verification
loops. And so it's really good at coding
because you can run unit tests.
And science might be similar because you
can run experiments. And I think what
that
doesn't appreciate one is that
experiments actually don't There's an
infinite number of theories that are
compatible with any given experiment.
And
over time why we glob onto the what we
at least in retrospect we think is a
more correct one is as we're discussing
in this conversation, sort of hard to
articulate. Um
Latus actually has all kinds of
interesting examples in the book book
about these kinds of um
hostile verification loops that are
extremely long-lasting. Um So one he
talks about is um
Prout or Prout, I don't know how to
pronounce it, but there's this chemist
in 1815 he hypothesizes that all
atomic nuclei must have whole number
weights.
And they're basically all made up of
hydrogen. And it's the reason he thinks
this is because if you look at the
measure rates of all elements, it does
seem that they all almost all of them do
happen to have whole number weights. But
then there's some exceptions.
Like for example, chlorine comes out at
35.5.
And so then there's all these ad hoc
theories that people in this school keep
coming up with like, "Oh,
maybe there's chemical impurities." But
then there's no chemical reaction you
can do which seems to get rid of this.
Maybe it's fractions of whole numbers.
It's 35.5, it can be halves. But
actually measure chlorine even closer,
it's 35.46. It's actually getting
further away from the correct fraction.
Um And later on, what is discovered is
what you're actually measuring is
different isotopes
which cannot be chemically
distinguished. They can only be
physically distinguished.
Um But so then you just have a 85 years
before we realize what an isotope is
where the verification loop is actually
actively hostile against you against the
correct theory. And you just need this
remnant to be defending where there's no
ex ante reason it's the preferred
theory. Just
as a community, we should just have
people defend
try to integrate new observations even
if they don't seem to fit their school
of thought with what they believe. And
hopefully if enough of that happens
Anyways, yeah, I guess the thing that
I'm trying to articulate is
the difficulty with automating science.
Yeah, I mean the question is where is
the bottleneck at some at some level?
And sort of you know,
are we primarily bottlenecked on one
thing or one type of thing? Or are we
bottlenecked on sort of multiple types
of thing? Um
uh
So you know, certainly talking to
structural biology people, they seem to
think that AlphaFold was an enormous
advance. It was a shock. So at some
level, yes, AI can you know, it seems
certain it can help us speed up science.
So it is it is helping with a certain
type of bottleneck.
>> Yeah. Um that doesn't mean though as
you're saying that it it's necessarily
going to help with all kinds of
bottlenecks. And and sort of I suppose
the the question you're pointing at is
like what are the types of bottlenecks
that remain? And what are the prospects
for the for for getting past them?
I think even in the case of of of
coding, like it's really interesting you
know, talking to programmer friends
yeah, at the moment they're all in this
state of
shock and high excitement and they're
all over the place actually kind of kind
of talking to them.
Um
You do wonder like where is the
bottleneck going to move to? So
certainly one thing that a lot of them
seem to be bottlenecked on is now
having interesting ideas and in
particular having interesting design
ideas.
So there's not really a verification
loop for knowing, "Oh, that design idea
is you know, is very interesting."
So so they're no longer nearly as
bottlenecked by their ability to produce
code, but they are still bottlenecked by
this other by this other thing. They
always were They were formerly they
weren't bottlenecked on it because you
know, just writing code was took so much
of their time. They could sort of have
lots of ideas while they were you know,
they they take their three weeks to
implement their prototype and then they
would implement the next version. Now
they're taking three hours to implement
the the prototype and they don't have
you know, as good ideas sort of after
that from a design point of view.
Last year, I predicted that by 2028, AI
would be able to prep my taxes about as
well as a competent general manager. But
we're already getting pretty close. As I
shared before, I use Mercury both for my
business and my personal banking. So, I
recently gave an LLM access to my
transaction history across both accounts
through Mercury's MCP. I asked it to go
through all my 2025 transactions and
flag any personal expenses that seem
like they should actually be charged to
the business.
And this worked shockingly well.
Mercury's MCP exposes a bunch of
detailed information. Things like notes
and memos and any JPEGs of receipts and
PDF attachments. So, my LLM had plenty
of context to work with. One of my
favorite examples happened with a charge
to Bay Padelle. If you looked at the
vendor alone, you would have had to
assume that it's a personal expense. But
the LLM looked at the receipt and the
attached note in Mercury and realized it
was actually a team bonding exercise
from our last in-person retreat. So, a
legitimate business expense. I imagine
it will be a while before traditional
banks have MCP. Functionality like this
is why I use Mercury. Go to mercury.com
[music] to learn more. Mercury is a
fintech company, not an FDIC insured
bank. Banking services provided through
Choice Financial Group and Column N.A.
members FDIC.
You have a very interesting take. I
think it was a footnote one of your
essays and I couldn't find it again.
Which was that it's very possible that
if we met aliens, that they would have a
totally different technological stack
than us.
And that contradicts, I guess, a common
sense assumption I had that I never
questioned, which is that science is
this thing you do very relatively early
on in the history of civilization
where you get to a point and you have a
couple hundred years of just cranking
through the basics, understanding how
the universe works, etc. And you got it.
You got science.
Um and then basically everybody would
converge on the same  science.
And so, I found that a very interesting
idea and I want you to say more about
it. Yeah. Uh
I mean I think the
probably the the idea there that that
I'm at least somewhat attached to is um
the idea that the sort of the
the the tech tree or the science and
tech tree
um
is probably much larger than we realize.
I mean, we're we're sort of in this this
funny situation. People will sometimes
talk about um you know, a theory of
everything as a potential goal for
for physics. And and then there's this
presumption somehow that physics is done
once you get there. And of course, this
is this is not true at all if you think
about computer science.
Um computer science basically got
started in the 1930s
uh when Turing and Church and so on um
just laid down what the theory of
everything was. They just said, you
know, here's how computation works um
and then we've spent uh 90 odd years uh
since then just exploring consequences
of that and gradually building up more
and more interesting ideas. Um and those
ideas are to some extent you can just
regard as as technology, but to some
extent insofar as they're sort of
discovered principles inside that theory
of computation, I think they're
best regarded as uh science and and in
some cases very fundamental science.
Ideas like public key cryptography are I
mean, they're just incredibly deep um
very non-obvious ideas uh which in some
sense lay hidden
uh already sort of in in the 1930s. And
and so, my expectation is that different
yeah, there will be different ways of
exploring this tech tree and we're still
relatively low down. We're still at the
point where we're just understanding
these basic fundamental uh theories and
we haven't yet explored them. Uh uh sort
of a a
a thing which I think is quite fun is if
you look at just just the phases of
matter. When I was in school, we'd get
taught that there are three phases of
matter or sometimes four phases of
matter or five phases of matter
depending a little bit on on what you
you included. And then um
as an adult, as a physicist, you start
to realize, oh, we've been adding uh
uh uh uh
to this list. We've got sort of
superconductors and superfluids and
maybe different types of superconductors
and Bose-Einstein condensates and uh the
quantum Hall systems and fractional
quantum Hall systems and and and and and
and and it it's starting to turn out it
looks like actually there's a lot of
phases of matter to discover.
Um and we're going to discover a lot
more of them. Um and in fact, we're
going to be able to start to design them
in some sense. I mean, we you know,
we'll still be subject to the laws of
physics, but but there is this sort of
tremendous freedom in there. And this
looks to me like, oh, we're down at sort
of the bottom of the tech tree. We've
barely gotten started there. Um and and
I expect that uh uh
you know, to be to be the case sort of
broadly. Certainly in terms of
I think programming is a very natural
place to look. The idea that we've
discovered all the deep ideas
uh in programming just seems to me sort
of obviously ludicrous. Uh you know, we
keep discovering sort of what seems like
deep new fundamental ideas. Um and um
I mean, we're very limited. We're we're
basically slightly jumped up
chimpanzees.
Um so, we don't uh
you know, we're we're slow and it's
taking us time. Um but but you you know,
what what do we look like sort of
another million years in the future in
terms of
uh
you know, all of the different ideas uh
which people have had around how to
how to to manipulate computers, how to
manipulate information. I I think you
know, we're we're likely to discover
that actually there are a lot of very
deep ideas still to be still to be
discovered. So, nice uh who was it? I
think it was Knuth in the preface to the
art of computer programming said
something like, you know, he started
this book back in the '60s
and he talked to a mathematician who was
a bit contemptuous
and said, look, computer science isn't
really a thing yet. Come back to me when
there's a thousand deep theorems. And
Knuth remarks
uh and he's writing this now decades
later the the preface, there are there
clearly are a thousand deep theorems
now. Um and that that means like it it's
really interesting to to sort of think
about it. Like what what's the the the
long-term future? As you get higher and
higher up in the the tech tree, like
choices about which direction uh we go
and sort of how we choose to explore,
you know, I I I think it it's
potentially the case that we're you
know,
uh uh different civilizations or
different choices mean that we end up in
different parts uh of that tree. Um and
in particular, just things I mean, sort
of very basic things about um
you know, we're very visual creatures.
Certain other animals are are much more
orally uh based. Does that bias uh uh
sort of the the types of thoughts that
you have? And then you extend it, you
know, to sort of much more exotic uh
kinds of of civilizations where maybe
just sort of their biases in terms of
how they perceive and how they they they
uh manipulate the world are maybe quite
different than ours. Um and that might
uh
make some some significant changes in
terms of how they do that exploration of
of the tech tree. Uh it's all
speculation, obviously. No, this is such
an interesting take. I I want to better
understand it. So, um
one way to understand it is that there
might there might be some things which
are so fundamental and have such a wide
collision area against reality that
they're inevitably going to discover
like general relativity.
>> Numbers. Numbers. Yeah, yeah. Like
you like of all of the the intelligences
in in the Milky Way galaxy, how maybe
that number is one. Uh
actually arguably we've already
increased the number.
Um but um but but you know, of all of
those, what fraction of the concept of
counting? And you know, it does seem
very natural. What fraction have
discovered you know, the idea of of some
kind of you know, decimal place system?
Interesting question. Like
uh and maybe we're missing something
really simple and obvious that's
actually way better than that. Um what
fraction got there immediately? What
fraction sort of had to go through some
other intermediate state? What fraction
use you know, linear representations
versus say, you know, I don't know,
two-dimensional or three-dimensional
representation? The I think the answers
to these questions are just not at all
obvious. There's a lot of design
freedom.
On theoretical computer science,
this is
this is going to be extremely naive and
uh arrogant. But I took um Scott
Aaronson's,
you know, class on complexity theory and
I was by far the worst student he's ever
had. But I what I remember is like
the there there was a period that you
you were you know, you were one of the
pioneers of where we figured out, here's
here's the class of problems that
quantum computers can solve and how it
relates to problems that classical
computers can solve. It's like
groundbreaking, oh, crazy that that this
works.
And then since then it's been
this literally it's called complexity
zoo, this website which lists out,
here's all the complexity classes. And
if you have this complexity class with
this kind of oracle, it's sort of
equivalent to this other class.
And that it feels like we're building
out that taxonomy. Yeah. And so, there's
a couple ways to understand what you're
saying. One, maybe you just disagree
with me that this is actually what's
happened with this field. Um another is
that while that might happen to any one
field, the amount of fields, who would
have thought in 1880 that computer
science, other than Babbage or
something, that computer science was
going to be a thing in the first place.
So, the amount of field we're
underestimating how many more fields
there could be.
>> Yeah, yeah, for sure. Um or maybe you
think both or maybe a third secret
thing, but I'd be curious. Uh I mean
you know, a a very common argument here
is sort of the the low-hanging fruit
argument. The argument that says, oh,
there should be diminishing returns. And
in fact, empirically we see this, right?
The amount of scientists in the world
has just exponentially increased. And
and
I mean, I I I think it's you know, it's
worth thinking about like, why why do
you expect diminishing returns? And how
well does that argument actually apply
um in practice? And an analogy I like um
is is actually thinking about sort of
you know, going to some event, going to
a wedding or whatever and you go to the
dessert buffet and they've put out, you
know,
30 desserts.
And of course, naturally what people do,
right? The best desserts go first. I
mean, we don't quite have a well-ordered
preference
there. So, maybe there's some
difference, but um
but but human beings are fairly similar.
So, they would they you know,
the best desserts will go first.
And this is an argument, you know, for
why you expect diminishing returns in a
lot of different
fields. If it's relatively easy to see
what's available and people have similar
preferences, then the best stuff goes
first and and and you know, it just gets
sort of worse and worse after that. And
and sort of if you you a very static
snapshot in time of scientific progress,
maybe there's some truth to that. Um but
if somebody, you know, is standing
behind the dessert table and is
replenishing, restocking the desserts
and keeps kind of you know, adding
adding new ones in, it may turn out that
you know, a little bit later a much
better desserts appear. Uh uh and and
so, you're going to go and you're going
to go and eat those instead. And
scientific progress has a little bit of
that flavor. Um you know, we we go
through this sort of funny time periods
computer science is a great example
where computer science basically arose
as sort of a side effect of some pretty
abstruse questions
um in the the philosophy of mathematics
and and and and logic. Um and so, you've
got these people trying to to attack
these rather esoteric questions that
seem quite high up in some sense in in
sort of exploration quite esoteric. And
they discover this fundamental new field
and all of a sudden there's an explosion
there. Um so so sort of the the
diminishing returns argument just didn't
didn't apply there. We just weren't able
to see Yeah. uh what was there and and
and this has been the case over and over
and over again. Sort of new fields um
arrive and all of a sudden boom, it's
actually easy to make progress again.
Young people flood in cuz you can be 21
and and make major breakthroughs Yeah.
rather than having to spend 25 years you
know, mastering everything that's been
done before. Um it's obviously very
attractive. Um and I don't understand
I'm not sure anybody understands very
well um sort of the dynamics of that
like how to think about why the
structure of knowledge is is that way.
Um that these new fields keep keep
opening up. Um but but it does seem
empirically at least to to be the case.
Despite the fact that that is a case.
>> Yeah.
Take deep learning, right? Obviously,
this is an example of a new field where
the 21-year-olds can make progress.
And um it's relatively new 15 years or
so.
It would would it sort of
gets back into high gear.
Um
but already we're in a stage where
you need
billions or tens of billions or hundreds
of billions of dollars to keep making
progress at the frontier. Yeah. And
there's a couple of ways to understand
that. One is that it actually is harder
than the kinds of things the ancients
had to do or requires more is more
intensive at
>> Second is it might not have been, but
because our civilization resources are
so large the amount of people is so
large, the amount of money is so large
that we can basically make the kind of
progress it would have taken the
ancients
forever to make almost immediately. We
just we notice something is productive,
immediately dump in all the resources.
Mhm. Um
but it's also weird that there's not
that many of them. Like I feel like deep
learning
is notable because it is one big
exception to the fact that it's hard to
think of other examples. Yeah. I mean,
it's a consequence of sort of
you know, the architecture of of
attention, right? Like at any given
time, there's always a sort of a a most
successful thing. Yeah, maybe if if deep
learning wasn't a thing, maybe you'd be
talking about CRISPR. Maybe you'd be
talking about you know, whatever it is.
Maybe um you know, maybe we wouldn't
think about uh solving uh sort of the
protein structure prediction problem as
a um
really a success of AI. Maybe we would
have figured out how to doing it with
sort of curve fitting like Right.
>> more broadly construed and we'd just be
like, oh wow, like we took a lot of
computing resources, but but protein
structure prediction might you know, be
a an enormously important thing. So,
there is always
sort of our biggest thing. Um
and and I think what you're pointing at
is more a consequence of of the way in
which attention gets centralized.
>> Yeah. It's basically fashion. It's it's
sort of what I'm saying. It's not just
fashion, but but but there is some
dynamic there. Um there's a very
interesting and important implication of
this idea Mhm. uh that the branching is
so wide and so contingent and so path
dependent
that different civilizations would
stumble on entirely different technology
sets. Yeah.
>> There's a very interesting implication
that there will there will be gains from
trade Yeah. into the far far future
>> Yeah. Yeah, it's interesting.
>> which might actually be one of the most
important facts about the far future
in terms of how civilizations are set
up, how they can coordinate
how they interface with like there's not
this like go forth and exploit. It's
actually there are humongous gains to
trade from adjacent colonies or
whatever. That that
yeah.
Sort of there's a question of like
what's actually hard. Um you know, if
it's a question of if it's just the
ideas well, those spread relatively
quickly. It's relatively easy to to
share ideas. If it's something more,
it's almost sort of a Dan Wang kind of
an idea where it's it's actually sort of
there's some notion of capacity. You
need all the right text, you need all of
the right manufacturing capacity and so
on. Mhm. And so, you know, civilization
A has very different kind of
manufacturing capacity and it's just not
so easy to build in civilization B even
if civilization B is kind of ahead, then
then I think that that becomes true.
There is actually you know,
comparative advantage which is really uh
uh worth um
I mean, it's going to going to provide
massive benefits to trade in both
directions. Eventually, you're going to
expect some diffusion of of innovation.
Um uh it is funny like to think about
what the barriers are there. A a fun
thought experiment I I like to think
about is um
sort of you know, GitHub but for aliens.
Um so, you know, somebody presents you
with all of the code um uh from some
alien civilization. And I mean, I don't
even know what what code means there,
but this sort of their specification of
algorithms. Um
and and it's so like it would have many
interesting new ideas in there and it
would take forever for human beings to
dig through and to try and extract
>> uh all of those. The
one reason I I mean, the the origin of
this for me was actually thinking about
um uh proteins in in in nature. Um yeah,
we've been gifted uh just this
incredible variety of machines which we
don't understand really at all and we
just have to go and sort of try and
understand them on a you know,
one-by-one basis. We're still
understanding hemoglobin and insulin and
things like this. Um and no doubt you
know, and there's hundreds of millions
of proteins known. Um so, it is it is a
little bit like that. We've been gifted
by biology uh just this immense library
uh of of machines no doubt containing an
enormous number of very interesting
ideas and we're just at the very very
very beginning of understanding it. So,
actually I mean, that that's that's I
suppose kind of your point actually is
is um you know, I I need to relabel your
argument slightly, but you sort of think
of that as as a gift from an alien
civilization which obviously it isn't,
but you think of it that way.
And it's like, oh my goodness, like
there's so much in there and we're going
to study it and goodness knows how long
we could continue to study it. There's
tens of thousands of papers about the
you know, hemoglobin and things like
that and we still don't understand them.
And yet we're getting so much out of it.
Just I mean, just think about insulin
alone. You know, it's such an an
important such an important thing. That
that's that's an incredibly useful
intuition from that you have on Earth.
I had Nick Lane on where he had this
theory about how life emerged, but like
whatever theory you have basically
something like DNA 4 billion years and
you have an alien civilization coming
here and be like, there's all these
interesting things to learn about
material science um
about
you name it, right? Like about all of
this
>> kinesin walking along. Like I mean, and
we know almost nothing about these
proteins and yet the tiny few facts we
do know are just just incredible. And
it's a ribosome. Yeah. You know, another
example. I mean, this is a miraculous
engineer uh uh
sort of device. Uh uh little factory.
And all seeded by just like there's this
particular chemistry on Earth uh
with nucleic acids and carbon-based life
forms that that chemistry gives rise to
all of these interesting things which an
alien civilization would find very
interesting. And so, that that that very
that seed which must be one among you
know, trillions of possible seeds of I
mean, just of general intellectual ideas
Yeah. leads to all this fecundity. That
that's a very interesting intuition
from. I I want to meditate on this gains
for trade thing because I feel like
>> I think there's something actually very
interesting about this idea
that if you have this vision
[clears throat] of what techno how how
technology progresses and how it's very
different from in different
civilizations it has important
implications about how different
civilizations might interact with each
other.
Like the fact that they're going to be
these huge gains from trade.
>> It it makes friendliness much more
rewarding. Right?
>> Yeah.
That's a very important observation.
Yeah. I hadn't thought I hadn't thought
about that at all. That's really That is
a very interesting observation. Yeah.
Um
It is funny. I mean
you know, comparative advantage is
something that people
you know, they they love to invoke and
it is it's a very beautiful idea
obviously. Um
there are limits to it. Like
um
you know, it's kind of a it's
it's a special limited model. We don't
we don't you know, Chimpanzees can do
interesting things. We don't trade with
them. Um
uh
and I think it's sort of interesting to
think about the the reasons why. Yeah.
Um
Yeah, and part of it is just power, I
think. Like, once there's a sufficiently
large power imbalance, um,
very often,
not always, but very often groups of
people seem to to sort of shift into
this other mode where they just seek to
dominate. Um, and you know, maybe
there's something special about human
beings, um, but but maybe it's also sort
of a more general
sort of a thing. So, they're not then no
give up, you know, you need all these
special things to be true before groups
will trade.
>> Yeah. Um, and uh, yeah,
it it's it's not necessarily obvious.
Well, I I think the big thing going on
here is one, transaction costs. Yeah.
And two, comparative advantage does not
tell you
that
the
terms on which the trade happens
are above subsistence for any given one
producer. So, people often bring this up
in the context of well, humans will be
employed even in post-AGI world because
of comparative advantage. This big
There's There's like five different ways
that argument breaks down, but the
easiest ways to understand are
why why don't we have forces all around
on the roads because there's some
comparative advantage between
>> Exactly. cars and horses. Good example.
Well, there's huge One, there's huge
transaction costs to building roads that
are compatible with horses and cars at
the same time. In a similar way, AIs
were thinking at 1,000 times the speed
and can sort of shoot their latent
states again at each other are going to
find it way more costly than the benefit
in just in terms of interacting with you
to have a human being
in the supply chain.
And second, that um,
just because there's a
horses have a comparative advantage
mathematically does not mean that it is
worth paying 100k a year or whatever
cost to sustain a horse in San
Francisco.
Um, [snorts]
that subsistence is going to be worth
the benefit you get out of the horse. I
I I do think it's interesting like that
that just this the sheer fact that
it you know, my expectation and my
intuition obviously differs a great deal
from from yours on this, you know, is
that most parts of the tech tree are
never going to be explored. Mhm.
>> Um, there's just too many interesting
ways of combining things. There's too
many sort of deep ideas waiting to be
uh,
discovered and when it you know, not
only we, but but nobody ever is going to
to discover most of them. So, choices
about how to make how to do the
exploration actually matter quite a bit.
Interesting. I it's it's something I
really dislike about sort of
technological determinist arguments. I'm
willing to buy it sort of low enough
down when, you know, progress is
relatively simple,
um,
but but higher up you start to get to
shape
the way in which you you do the
exploration and it's interesting, you
know, people we are starting to shape it
in in in interesting ways. Um, you know,
sort of I mean, there's various
technologies that have been essentially
banned. You think about DDT, you think
about chlorofluorocarbons, you think
about
restrictions on the use of nuclear
weapons, the nuclear nonproliferation
treaty.
Um, those kinds of things are, you know,
they're not
they weren't done before the fact, um,
but they
are starting to get pretty close in in
some cases where we just sort of
preemptively decide, oh, we're not going
to go down that path. Mhm. Um, so that
starts to look like a set of
institutions which where we are actually
influencing, um,
sort of how we how we explore the tech
tree. Yeah. And where you would see
these gains from trade, obviously would
be you'd see them most where it's pure
information that can be sent back and
forth because information has this
quality where it is expensive to
produce,
but cheap to verify and cheap to send.
Yep. Um,
and so it'll be interesting how much of
future productivity or whatever can be
distilled down to information. I right
now it's kind of hard to do because you
can't really transfer like if China's
really good at manufacturing something,
well, there's this process knowledge
that's in the heads of 100 million
people involved in the manufacturing
sector in China. But in the future it
might be easier if AIs are doing I mean,
the question about sort of to what
extent does our, you know,
fabrication get sort of very uniform and
get really commoditized like, you know,
3D printers have been the next big thing
for at least 20 years now. Um,
you know, why do they still not work all
that well? Why are they still not
actually the center of of of
manufacturing and sort of what comes
after that? You know, it is funny to
look at say the ribosome by contrast, it
really is at the center of biology in a
whole lot of really interesting ways.
Um,
and and whether or not that's the future
of manufacturing is something very
simple sort of where you know,
everything goes as sort of as as
throughput through
I don't know, maybe it's a bioreactor or
something like that. So, you send the
information and then you grow stuff. Um,
or you have some 3D printer that
actually works.
Um,
and and yeah, if they're good enough,
then actually it does become much more a
pure information problem and some of
this process knowledge becomes much less
important.
Jane Street has a lot of compute, but
GPUs are very expensive. And so, even
optimizations that have a relatively
small effect on GPU utilization are
still extremely valuable. Two of Jane
Street's ML engineers, Corwin and
Sullivan, walk through some of their
optimization workflows at GTC. You're
not bottlenecked on the network being
too slow. You're bottlenecked on waiting
for a different rank in your training
not having completed the work. They
talked about how Jane Street profiles
traces and diagnoses bottlenecks and
then how they solve them using
techniques like CUDA graphs and CUDA
streams and custom kernels. With these
sorts of optimizations, Corwin and
Sullivan were able to get their training
steps down from 400 milliseconds to 375
milliseconds each. This 25 millisecond
difference might sound small, but given
the size of Jane Street's fleet, that
improvement could free up thousands of
B200s. [music]
Jane Street open-sourced all the
relevant code. If you want to check it
out, I've linked the GitHub repo and the
talk in the description below. And if
you find this stuff exciting, Jane
Street is hiring researchers and
engineers. Go to janestreet.com/twarcas
to learn more.
Can I ask a very clumsily phrased
question? So, there's
there's these deep principles
that we've discovered a couple of.
One is this idea that, hey, if there's a
symmetry across a dimension it
corresponds to a conserved quantity.
It's a very deep idea. There's another
which you've written a lot about,
written a textbook about in fact, about
there is
we
there's ways to understand this thing of
what kinds of things you can compute,
what kinds of physical systems you can
understand with other physical systems.
>> Mhm.
What a universal computer looks like,
etc.
And is your view that
if you go down to this level of idea of
Noether's theorem or the Church-Turing
principle
that there's an infinite number of
extremely deep such principles. I mean,
what makes them special is that they
themselves encompass
so many different possible ways the
world could be, but no, it has the the
world has to be compatible with I'll
show you a couple of these very deep
principles.
I don't know. I I mean, yeah, I just All
I have here is speculation and sort of
instinct. My instinct is we keep
Interesting. we keep finding very
fundamental new things. It was very, I
mean, for me anyway, quite formative to
understand as I say, you know, I gave
the example before there's these
wonderful ideas of of Church and Turing
and and these other people's ideas about
universal programmable
devices and then you understand later,
oh, this also contains within it the
ideas of public key cryptography and
then you understand later, oh, that also
contains within it um, the ideas, I
mean, people refer to it as as
cryptocurrency or whatever, but there's,
you know, very deep set of ideas there
about the ability to collectively
maintain an agreed upon ledger um, which
are built which is built upon this. And
there's probably, you know, many deep
ideas to sort of actually took whatever,
it's taken many years really to to
figure out the right canonical form of
of those.
Um,
and and so just this fact that you you
you keep finding what seem like deep new
fundamental primitives,
um,
I find very for me that's
has been a very important intuition bump
and it's across
I mean, I've given that particular
example, but I I think you see that same
pattern in a lot of different areas.
What is your interpretation then of this
empirical phenomenon where ideas like
whatever input you consider into the
scientific process or technological
process, economists have studied this a
million and 100 ways
it just seems to require even I I
actually very consistent rate X% more
researchers per year. So, there's this
famous paper from a couple years ago
um, by Nicholas Bloom and others where
they say, how many people are working in
the semiconductor industry?
And how does it increased over time?
Yeah, but It's the through the history
of Moore's law. And I think they find
like Moore's law means the computing
increases 40% a year or
transistor density increases 40% a year,
but to keep that going, the amount of
scientists has increased 9% a year in
the semiconductor industry. And they go
through industry after industry with
this observation.
And so, is your view that they are these
deep ideas that are getting harder to
find or is that no, there's there's
another way to think about what's
happening with these empirical
observations?
I mean, they are so First of all, all of
their examples are narrow, right? They
all they pick a particular thing and
then they look at some Mhm.
particular metric.
You know, nowhere in that shows up like
GPUs don't show up there.
Right? Like in the sense of, oh, you
know, all of a sudden you get this
ability to parallelize
and that's really interesting.
So, so there's sort of
a lot of external consequences that are
just delighted from basically, you know,
they have these simple quantitative
measures. They look at it in
agricultural productivity, they look at
it
in a whole lot of
different ways,
but you do have to focus narrowly.
And and I suppose, you know, I'm
certainly interested as I say in this
this fact that that just new types of
progress yeah, keep becoming possible.
But
yeah, there is still, I think even
there,
there does seem to be some phenomenon of
of diminishing returns.
You know, is that intrinsic? Is that
something about the structure of the
world?
What is it? Well, one thing which hasn't
changed that much is is you know, sort
of the individual minds which are doing
this kind of work. And you know, maybe
that those should be sort of being
improved as well.
Or some sort of you know, feedback
process going on there.
You know, and and and you know,
maybe that changes the nature of things.
I I suppose I I
I look at scientific progress
up until let's say 1700, something like
that. And it was very slow. And also it
was very irregular. You know, you had
the Ionians back sort of
five centuries before Christ
doing these quite remarkable things.
And then so much knowledge like would
would get lost and then it would be
rediscovered and then it would be lost
again.
And you'd have to say that that progress
was was very slow. And and there it's
partially just bound up with the fact
that there were some very good ideas
that we just didn't have.
Even once you've had the ideas, then you
need to build institutions around them.
You actually need to solve a whole lot
of different problems about training,
about allocation of capital, about all
these kinds of things. Even just about
basic sort of security for researchers
so they're not you know, worried about
the Inquisition or or things like that.
So there's all these kind of complicated
problems. You solve all those
complicated problems and then all of a
sudden boom, there's a massive sort of
burst of scientific progress.
If you're not changing it, if there's
some kind of stagnation there, if you're
not changing those external sort of
circumstances, yes, like you may start
to get
sort of diminishing returns again. But
that doesn't mean there's anything
intrinsic about the situation.
You know, maybe maybe something you
know, just external needs to change
again.
You know, obviously a lot of people
think AI is potentially
going to be going to be a driver. I
mean, it certainly will at some level.
In fact,
you know, to the extent you can think of
a lot of modern scientific
instrumentation as really
I mean, at some level kind of
robots.
You know, what is the James Webb Space
Telescope? Well,
you know, it's unconventional maybe to
describe it as a robot, but it's not
completely unreasonable either.
You know, it is an example of a highly
automated, very sophisticated system
with electronically mediated
sensors and actually way it is. Where
machine learning in fact is being used
to process the data.
So so in that sense we're already
starting to sort of see that transition.
We've been seeing it for decades.
I I I have this smoke a joint and take a
puff thought which um I think we've had
a few.
>> Yeah, yeah. Well, I think we're going to
do that part of the conversation and
then you you can help me get my foot out
of my mouth and figure out a more
concrete way to think about it.
So the to your point that
AI
there's an actual revolution, the
Enlightenment and now there's AI and
each might
be a different pace or a different way
in which science happens.
If you think about the pace of how fast
such
transitions have been happening,
you can draw
the long span of human history this
hyperbolic
of the rate of growth is increasing. So
yeah, 100,000 years ago you had the
Stone Age. You go back even much
further, how long have primates been
around? It would be like let's say
millions of years and 100,000 years ago
the Stone Age. Then 10,000 years ago the
Agricultural Revolution.
Then 300 year 300 years ago the
Industrial Revolution each marked by
this exponent this increase in the rate
of exponential growth.
And then people think it's going to
happen again with AI.
But that would happen
potentially even faster.
It would not have occurred to somebody
at the beginning of the Industrial
Revolution that the next demarcation in
this trend will be
artificial intelligence.
Um
and so if things are getting faster
and it's hard to anticipate what the
next transition will be. I guess we just
think of this
singularity between now and AI and there
that's really what distinguishes the
past from the future.
But
we're just applying the same heuristic
that maybe people in the past have had.
Maybe the intelligence age is also quite
short.
And then the next thing after that is we
don't even have the
ontology to describe what it is, but it
would not the future will not think of
the past as like there's pre-intelligent
AI and post-AI. No, that seems um
I mean,
obviously we can't prove this, but it's
it certainly seems seems quite
plausible. I mean,
part of the issue of course is is just
you know, the substrate we have
available to to to conceive like like
seems all wrong. You you can't speculate
with a bunch of chimpanzees about what
it would be like to have language.
Um
you know, just to sort of pick a a major
transition in the in in the past, it's
the the transition itself is the thing.
Um and it seems likely.
If we're talking about
taking a puff
kind of thoughts,
you know, I'm certainly amused by the
idea that
there's going to be some transition
involving
artificial general intelligence
um
using classical computers.
But actually there'll be an interesting
transition with quantum computers as
well. They're probably capable of a sort
of a a strictly larger class of of of
potentially interesting computations. So
maybe actually the the character of
AQGI or whatever it should be called um
is actually qualitatively different.
So yeah, maybe there's sort of a brief a
brief period between those two things.
Interesting. I mean, as I say, you know,
this is just is just speculation, but
it's certainly amusing. Is there a
reason I think that is
from what I understand there's been
for decades people like you have put
pretty tight bounds on the kinds of
things quantum computers can do and so
speed up search somewhat. It will do
um
and the kinds of things it extremely
speeds up like Shor's algorithm, it
seems like it again, maybe this is to
your point that we can't predict in
advance what's down the tech tree, but
at least from now here it seems like
you're breaking encryption, but what
else are you using Shor's algorithm?
Yeah, I mean, we've only been thinking
about it for 30 years or whatever.
It's 40 40 or so years.
Not for very long. And we sort of
haven't in some sense thought that hard
about it as a civilization. So
does it turn out that it's very narrow?
Maybe.
Does it turn out that it's very broad?
That's also
like a really radical expansion. That
seems distinctly possible. Like keep in
mind as well, we've been doing it
without the benefit of having the
devices. Right. Like that's a pretty big
bottleneck to have.
If you're thinking about computer
science in the 1700s and you're like,
okay, I can do and and or. What what
what are you going to do? You you can't
anticipate Bitcoin. You can't anticipate
deep learning. No. I mean, maybe you
could if you were you know, sufficiently
bright, but it is a pretty hard
situation, right? What is your inside
view um
having
been in and contributing to quantum
information quantum computing
back in the 90s and 2000s. What what is
your telling of the history? What was
the bottleneck? What was the what was
the key
transition that made it a real field
and how how do you rank sort of the
contributions for Feynman to Deutsch to
everybody else that came along? Yeah, so
I mean, I mean, let's just focus on sort
of the the question about sort of what
you know, what actually changed? So so
why was quantum computing not a thing in
the 1950s? Right. Like it could have
been.
You know, somebody like I don't know,
John von Neumann, good example.
Absolutely pioneering
computation. Also wrote a very important
book about quantum mechanics and was
deeply interested in quantum mechanics.
Like he could have invented quantum
computing at that time.
And I think there were there were quite
a number of people who who potentially
could have. So why do we have papers by
people like Feynman and Deutsch in the
80s? And those are uh
you know, I think fairly regarded as the
foundation of of the field. There are
some partial anticipations a little bit
earlier, but but they were nowhere near
as as comprehensive and nowhere near as
as deep.
And well, you should you should ask
David. You can't ask you can't ask
Feynman unfortunately, but
you know, he'll know much better than I
do.
A couple of things that I think are
interesting. One is that of course
computation became far more salient sort
of late 70s, early 80s.
You know, it just became a thing which
might many more people were interested
in partially for for very banal reasons.
You could go and buy a PC. You could buy
an Apple II. You could buy a Commodore
64. You could buy all these kinds of
things. Became apparent to people that
these were very powerful devices, very
interesting to think about. At the same
time in the quantum case, that was also
the time of the pole trap and and the
ability to trap single ions and and so
on. And up to that point we hadn't
really had the ability to manipulate
single quantum states. So you kind of
got these two separate things that just
for historically contingent reasons had
both
sort of matured around sort of let's say
1980 or so.
And
somebody like von Neumann could have had
the idea earlier, but it you know, is I
think quite an interesting
You know, in fact, you know, a story
about Richard Feynman. He went and got
one of the first PCs which around 1980,
1981.
And
he was apparently just so excited
with this device. You know, he he
actually tripped and and hurt himself
quite badly
sort of carrying his brand new
computing device.
You know, that that's a
very historically contingent sort of a
coincidence, but but having somebody
who's, you know, very, very,
sort of talented and and understanding
of of quantum mechanics, also just very
excited about these new machines.
It's not so surprising perhaps that that
he's thinking then
what similar story could you have told
10 years earlier? Like there is just no
the conditions don't exist for it. So I
think that's I mean it's quite a banal
story, but one of the things we were
going to discuss was
this idea you had about the market for
follow-ups. And I think this is actually
the perfect story
to discuss it for because
you wrote the textbook about the field,
right? You
Mike and Ike is the definitive textbook
on quantum information.
And so
you
presumably came in after Deutsch, but
you identified
in the '90s somehow identified it as the
thing that is worth following up on and
building on. And instead of talking
about it more abstractly, I I'd love to
actually just hear the story of like in
the first answer of how did you know
that this is the thing to of all the
things that were happening in physics
and computing, etc. that I want to think
about this problem. Sure, sure.
So
you Richard Feynman writes this great
paper in 1982. David Deutsch writes a
absolutely fantastic paper in 1985,
sort of sketching out a lot of the
fundamental ideas of of quantum
computing.
So I'm, you know, I'm 11 in 1985. I'm
thinking about this. I'm playing soccer
and doing whatever.
But in 1992, I took a class on on
quantum mechanics that was really
terrific given by by Jared Milburn. And
I just went and asked Jared
one day after it's like the fifth
lecture or something. I said do you like
do you can do you have anything
you know, sort of papers or whatever
that that you could give me? And he said
come back come by my office in a couple
of days time. And I I did and he
presented me with a giant stack of
of papers which included the Deutsch
paper, included the Feynman paper,
included a whole bunch of other
sort of very fundamental papers about
about quantum computing and quantum
information. At a time when essentially
nobody in the world was working on it.
He was.
He'd actually I think he wrote the very
first paper that proposed
I mean sort of a practical approach to
quantum computing. Wasn't very
practical, but it was actually in a real
in a real system. And so in some sense
you know, I'm
benefiting from the taste of this other
person.
But as soon as I read the papers
or take a look at the papers, like these
are exciting papers. You know, they're
they're asking very fundamental
questions and you're sort of like, oh,
we I can make progress here. Like these
are these are things that one could
potentially work on.
Deutsch has this
sort of conjecture that basically
you know, there should be
I don't know what the right term for it
is. He says so or
what what what you would call it
that
a universal model quantum Turing machine
should be capable of efficiently
simulating any system any physical
system at all. This is a very
provocative
idea. I think in that paper he more or
less claims that he's he's proved it.
I'm not sure that necessarily everybody
would would would would agree with that.
There's questions about whether or not
you can say simulate quantum field
theory effectively.
And that that kind of question is is I
think very interesting and very
exciting.
There is it's obviously a fundamental
question about about the universe.
You know, he has some wonderful ideas in
there about
sort of
quantum algorithms and where they come
from and what what they mean and what
they relate to the meaning of the wave
function and and questions like this
which is
still not
it's it's not agreed upon amongst
amongst physicists. So yeah, there's
just some sense of oh, I am in contact
with something which is A deeply
important and B
we as a civilization don't have this.
And so of course you you start to focus
your attention a little bit there. I'm
not sure I got
the answer to the question
that
maybe I misunderstood the question.
Let me let me let me let me take a crack
at it.
Maybe I'll maybe I'll explain the
motivation first.
So
in a previous conversation we're
discussing how could you have known in
the 1940s the Shannon theorems
and Shannon's way of thinking about
communication channel
is
a deep idea that goes beyond the
problems with pulse code modulation that
Bell Labs was trying to solve at the
time and it applies to everything from
quantum mechanics to genetics to
computer science obviously. And one of
the I think we and I think you you
stated that we didn't
get a chance to talk about it yet. But
this idea well
Shannon publishes paper. There's all
these other papers, but there's some
market of follow-ups where people
gravitate to and build upon Shannon's
work. And how do they realize that
that's the thing to do and how does that
process happen?
And so
I guess you you gave your local answer.
You read these papers and you
immediately realized okay, there's
work to be done here.
There's a low hanging fruit. There's
some deep provocative idea that I need
to better understand and I can I can you
know, tractably make progress on.
Yeah, I mean so you know, to some extent
you're sort of saying okay, I you know,
wanting to to get into this game of of
contributing to humanity's sort of
you know, understanding of of the
universe and you are applying sort of
this this low hanging fruit algorithm.
You're like relative to my particular
set of interests and abilities,
where should I
pick up my shovel and start digging?
And and there it was like oh, this this
looks like quite a good place to
to to start digging.
You know, and different people of course
chose very differently. It was it was a
very unusual choice at the at the time.
It was 1992.
Very few people were were thinking about
that. Yeah. Fast forwarding a bit so
you've been
I don't know how you think about your
work on the open science movement now.
But did it work? Like
what would successful there look like?
Or what what what what is it what is it
that that movement is trying to
accomplish?
Yeah, I mean
the set of ideas about open science. I
mean it's interesting you didn't stop
and and define open science there which
I think 20 years ago you would have had
to do.
People recognize the phrase. People have
some set of associations with it. Most
often they have a relatively simple set
of associations. It means maybe
something about making scientific papers
open access. Very often they have some
set of notions about maybe it means also
making code openly available. Maybe it
means
making data openly available. Um, but
already
those are
I think very large successes of the open
science movement
which is to make those salient issues.
Those issues on which people have
opinions and then there are there are
relatively common arguments. An argument
like so this is sort of this is sort of
the meme version. Publicly funded
science should be open science.
That's a you know, that's a distillation
of a set of ideas which you might be
able to contest.
But if you can get people actually sort
of thinking about it and and engaged
with that kind of argument,
you know, that's a very fundamental
an issue
to be considering in the the whole
political economy of science. If you go
back say three centuries,
there was a very similar kind of a an
argument prosecuted which is the
question do we publicly disclose our
scientific results or not? So if you
look at at people like Galileo and and
and Kepler and and so on,
the extent to which they publicly
disclosed like it was done in a very odd
kind of a way. They sometimes they did
bizarre things where they were the you
know, famously they published some of
their results as
anagrams. So basically, you know, they'd
find some discovery, they would
write down the result in sort of a
sentence like here's you know, the the
the discovery of of the I'm trying to
think of an example.
I think the moons of Mars I think was
one such
example. Um,
I'm I'm getting it wrong. Maybe was it
Hooke's law? Anyway, doesn't matter.
The point was they they they'd write it
down, but then they'd scramble it,
publish that, and then if somebody else
later made the same discovery, they
would unscramble the anagram and say oh,
you know, I actually did it first. This
is not an ideal way. It's not an ideal
foundation
for a discovery system. And then it took
I mean a very long time
over a century I think to to
obtain more or less the modern ideals in
which what you do is you disclose the
knowledge in the form of of a paper.
There is then an expectation of
attribution. And so there's a kind of
reputation economy which which gets
built. And so basically oh, such and
such did this work so they deserve the
credit for that. And that's then the
basis for their career. So this is sort
of the underlying political economy of
science. And that made a lot of sense
when what you've got is a printing press
and the ability to to do scientific
journals.
Then you transition to this modern
situation where in fact you can start to
share a lot more. You can start to share
your code. You can start to share your
data. You can start to share in progress
ideas. And but there's no
direct credit associated to those. It's
not at all obvious
sort of how much reputation should be
associated
to them. That's all constructed
socially.
And so making it a live issue
is I think a very important thing to
have done and that that's I view anyway
as one of the main positive outcomes of
of work on on open science. Should we
really practical sort of example to to
illustrate the problem? Um
for a long time in physics
there was a preprint culture in which
people would upload preprints
to the to the preprint archive and in
biology this didn't happen. Um, there
was no preprint culture. That's changing
now but but for a long time this was the
case. And I I used to sort of amuse
myself by asking physicists and
biologists why this was the case and
what I would hear sometimes from
biologists was they would say, "Well,
biology is so much more competitive than
physics
um
that we need to protect our priority and
so we can't possibly upload
to the archive. We have to have to just
publish in journals." And then I would
sometimes hear from physicists, "Physics
is so much more competitive than biology
that we need to establish our priority
by uploading as rapidly as possible to
the preprint archive. We can't possibly
wait to do it with the journals." And I
think this emphasizes the extent to
which this kind of attribution economy
is actually is just something we
construct. It's just something which we
do by by sort of agreement. And so
any attempt to sort of change that
economy
results then in a different system by
which we construct knowledge and and and
so there is sort of this very
fundamental set of problems
around the political economy of science.
Um,
you know, sort of we've got this
collective project and and how we
mediate it depends upon
the economy we have around ideas.
I I
one of the sort of things you've
emphasized as a as a part of this
project of of open science is
collective science or groups of people
making progress on a problem where no
individual understands all the logical
and explanatory levels necessary to
make a leap or connection.
Outside of mathematics, what is the best
example
of such a discovery?
>> I mean, I'm not sure I I I have a well
ordering of them to to give you a best
but I mean, yeah. I think an example
that I I think is is very interesting is
is the LHC where it's just this
immensely complicated object. Um, I
actually I years ago I I snuck into
an accelerator physics conference. I
didn't know anything at all about
accelerator physics but I was just kind
of curious to see what they were talking
about and this particular group of
people
were experts on numerical methods in
particular on inverse methods. And so
basically turns out
you know, inside these accelerators you
have these cascades so a particle, you
know, will be massively accelerated.
Maybe it'll be collided and then you'll
get a a shower of particles which decays
and decays and decays and and there's
just this incredible sort of
you know, consequential
shower which is ultimately what you see
at the detector and then you have to
retroactively figure out what produced
it.
And so there's these very very
complicated sort of inverse problems
that that need to be need to be solved.
You've got this final data but you need
to figure out what produced it and
that's how you look for sort of
signatures of these. And what many of
these people were was they were
incredibly deep experts on simulation
methods for sort of following particle
tracks. Um and like this was really deep
and difficult stuff and I'm like, "Wow,
you could spend a lifetime just learning
sort of how to do this and how to solve
some of these inverse problems and you
would know nothing
about or you would know very little
about quantum field theory, you would
know very little about detector physics,
you would know very little about vacuum
physics, all these other things that are
absolutely at work, very little about
data processing, very little about all
these things that are absolutely
essential um, to understanding
say the the the Higgs boson. Um, and I
don't think it's possible for one person
to understand everything in depth. Lots
of people understand broadly a lot of
these ideas but they don't understand
sort of everything in in the depth that
is actually utilized. That's why there's
these, you know, papers with with well
over a thousand authors.
Um, and those people can yeah, they can
talk to one another at a high level but
they don't understand each other's
specialties.
>> things like
>> like I mean, things like as I say,
you know, detector physics, vacuum
physics, these kinds of solving of
inverse problems, like this is stuff is
incredibly different from each other.
And and you know, to to understand it in
real detail is
serious work. Um
how do you think about prolificness
versus depth where I don't know, maybe
Darwin's an example of somebody who's
like
it is digesting on something for many
decades.
Uh, there's other examples where
Einstein during the year he comes up
with special relativity is just doing a
bunch of different things. Bias talks
about how they're all relevant to the
eventual build up. Yeah, I I
I mean, you know, it's something I
stress about a lot. Sometimes I feel
like I'm, you know, too slow.
Um, actually it's funny though. I mean,
the Darwin example is really
interesting. Like
you know, prolific at what? Like I mean,
I goodness how many letters he wrote. It
must have been an enormous
uh
number. So he was certainly very active.
Um there's also like there's there's
sort of there's two types of work that
tends to be involved in any kind of
creative project. There's routine stuff
and there you just want to avoid
procrastination. You just want to like,
you know, how do I get good at this or
how do I outsource it and how do I do it
as rapidly as possible? Um and just
avoid you know, like getting into a
situation where you're prolonging it.
Um, and then there's high variance stuff
where you actually you need to
be willing to to you know take a lot of
time. You need to be willing to go to to
the different places and talk to the
different people where in any given
instance most of it's just not it's not
going to be an input.
And somehow sort of balancing those two
things, I think a lot of people
are very good at doing one or the other
but it's hard to
it's almost like a personality trait
sort of you know, which one you prefer
and and people tend to end up doing a a
lot of a lot of one and and not enough
of of the other. Um, so I certainly
try and balance those two things. I
mean, Einstein is such an interesting
example. I mean, 1905 is just this
extraordinary year. Like you can delete
special relativity entirely and it's an
extraordinary year. You can delete
special relativity and you can delete
um, the photoelectric effect for which
he won the Nobel Prize and it's still an
extraordinary year. Like a plausibly a
multi Nobel Prize winning year. Um
uh, so what's he doing?
Yeah, I mean, maybe the answer is just
he's smarter than the rest of us. Um uh,
and and there's a lot of luck as well.
Um
uh
but but but but you know, I I certainly
for myself anyway, like trying to
identify those things
that are routine that I should get good
at um, and then you know, just just try
and do as quickly as possible. I think
that that's yielded a certain amount of
returns but also being willing to bet a
little bit more on myself on sort of the
variance side
has also been very very very helpful.
That's really hard.
Like cuz you intrinsically you're
putting yourself in situations where you
don't know what the outcome is going to
be. Um, and so if you're very driven to
be productive and whatever
and actually mostly it's not working
over there, you're like, "Let's reduce
this." Like it doesn't feel right.
When I worked in San Francisco, actually
a practice I used to have each day
was instead of taking the 15-minute walk
to work, I would take the the more
beautiful 30-minute walk walk to work
partially just cuz it was beautiful but
partially also um, as just a reminder to
like like there are real benefits to not
being efficient. Um, but it's not an
answer to your question. I mean, really
I think what I'm saying is I struggle a
lot with the question. I mean, there are
these um, Dean Keith Simonton, I forgot
his his exactly Yeah, yeah, I know who
you mean. Um, has this famous equal odds
rule where he says the probability that
any given thing you release, any paper,
book, whatever will be
extremely important for a given person
through their lifetime is not that
different and what really determines
uh,
in what era they're the most productive
is how much they're publishing. Any
given thing has equal odds of
being
extremely important.
It makes you think of some of the most
successful
creatives or scientists who are just
doing a lot like Shakespeare is just
publishing a lot. Yeah, yeah.
And of course there there's counter
examples. You know, Gödel publishing
almost nothing.
>> Yeah. Um
but I you know, broadly speaking,
you know, I think like you need a very
good reason to be avoiding it. This
to to
basically to
to not do that.
It's funny. I mean, I I've talked to a
I've met a lot of people over the years
who you talk to, they're clearly
brilliant and they're just obsessed that
they are going to work on the great
project that, you know, makes them
famous and they never do anything.
And that seems connected like it's a
type of aversiveness. I think very often
they just don't want public judgment.
Something I would love to see. Yeah,
there's an awful lot of of biographies
and memoirs and histories of
people who achieve a lot.
I wish there was like a very large
number of of biographies of people who
are fantastically talented Fantastically
who who, you know, just missed.
>> Yeah, yeah. Like like, you know,
absolutely, you know, I've known, you
know, people who won gold medals at at
IMOs and things like that who then,
you know, tried to become mathematicians
and failed. Yeah. Um like what what
happened? Like what what was the reason?
I suspect in many cases that's actually,
you know, more informative than anything
else.
Uh you have this essay
that I
um I was reading before this interview
about how you think about what is the
work you're doing.
Um
And writer doesn't seem like as you say
it was Charles Darwin a writer, right?
What what what is actually is that
label?
I'm a podcaster, right? So I'm
>> [laughter]
>> Uh and in in a way obviously our work is
very different. But I I I also think a
lot about
what is this work and how do I get
better at it?
And in particular how I can make sure
there's some compounding between the
different people I talk to on the
podcast. Where I worry that instead of
this kind of compounding there's
actually
I build up some understanding
that's somewhat superficial about a
topic and that depreciates. Then move to
on to the next topic and it sort of
depreciates. Um and so I think there's
this question there's a lot of
podcasters in the world who will
interview way more experts than I have
ever have and I don't think they're much
the
wiser or more knowledgeable as a result.
So there's it's clearly possible to mess
this up.
And I wonder if you have thoughts or
takes or advice
on how one actually learns
in a deeper way from this kind of work.
Yeah. I mean it's it's sort of an
incredibly
complicated and rich question. Um
I mean the thing like the sort of the
question is like you know, how do you
make it a high growth context? How do
you make it a more demanding
context? And sort of you know, you can
do that in like relatively small ways,
but they might have a yield compounding
returns or you can do something
that is maybe more radical. Maybe it
means actually, you know, starting sort
of a parallel project in which you do
something that is actually quite a bit
different. There's something I think
really interesting about like
how being very demanding
can simply change your your response to
to something. Something that that I
would sometimes do with with students
and sometimes with myself, was really
aimed more at myself, was you know, they
would say some week oh, you know, I'm
going to try and do you know, this work
over the coming week and then the next
week would come by and they you know,
they hadn't solved the problem or
whatever. And you you sort of like you
know,
if a million dollars had been at stake,
like would you have put the same effort
in? And the answer is no. Um sort of
invariably.
Um
like they've tried, but they haven't
really tried.
>> Yeah. Um and I think that's a very
familiar feeling for all of us. You
know, you sort of you you you you often
you you you could do a lot more if you
had just the right sort of demanding
taskmaster standing by you and saying
look, you're you're you're barely
operating here. Um and so I I do sort of
wonder a little bit about like, you
know, what's the what's the demanding
taskmaster? What what can they ask you
that is going to make your preparation
way more intense?
The most helpful thing honestly is
for some subjects it is very clear how I
prep. Like I'm doing an upcoming episode
on chip design with the founder of a
company that does chip design and he
wrote a textbook on chip design and he
yesterday I went over to his office and
we brainstormed five sort of rough line
analysis I can do. And if I understand
that I I have some good understanding.
The problem is with almost every other
field there's not this there's not like
you
I don't know when I interviewed you like
three, four years ago it's like
implement the transformer. And if you
implement it like you have some nugget
of understanding you've clamped down.
And with other fields it's just like I
vaguely understand this, it's not
clamped. I vaguely understand this. I
vaguely have a learned about this. I
have a learned about this, but there's
no forcing function
that you
do this exercise and if you do it you
will understand.
>> Yeah, so I mean really what you're sort
of saying is you can do a good job at
at podcasting without actually attaining
this kind of And that's the problem from
your point of view. You you want to sort
of change your job job description so
that you you are internalizing these
chunks and just getting this kind of
integration each time.
And it seems to me like you you know,
what that means is you actually want to
change the structure of the like like
like the work output at some level.
Um
Uh I mean lots of people think
Yeah, there's this terrible idea um
people have that that they should be in
flow all of the time. Yeah. Um
Uh and of course as far as I can tell
like high performance just don't believe
this at all. Um they're in flow some of
the time. Like you you certainly see
this with athletes. Yeah, when they're
actually out there, you know, playing
basketball or tennis or whatever,
ideally, you know, they are in flow much
of the time. But when they're training
they're not. Um they're stuck a lot of
the time or they're doing things badly.
Um
and I suppose I wonder what that looks
like for you. I I that I would be
extremely satisfied with. The problem is
I just like I don't know what the
equivalent of do the 64 lapses for
almost is. And so this is sort of a this
is a thing you can change by choosing
guests where there is a legible
curriculum. And so maybe it's a mistake
for not having done that. Or also like
there's no real way to prep for Terence
Tao or something and like there's no
curriculum that's like a plausible one.
I think um
Well, there's one failure mode. I mean
there's many failure modes, but one is
um
if you you could do one dynamic I'm
worried about, a long-term dynamic is
that you do good you can have a good
podcast and there's a local maximum, but
um you for no particular guest or topic
are you going deep enough that you I
think my model of learning is there's
if you don't really understand the
deeper mechanism, you're just mapping
inputs and outputs of a black box. Yeah,
yeah. And that just fades incredibly
fast or is not worth it in the first
place and you kind of just move on and
it's over. Yeah. Um and you kind of need
to build the intermediate
connection.
Um
And
it's it's unclear. I think actually AI
in a weird way is really easy for that
reason because there is a clear thing
you can do. Just implement it, right?
And then you understand it. We're almost
if I applied that criteria elsewhere,
what am I how do I just not do history
episodes?
>> Palmer exactly. Ada Palmer, like what
what you know, wonderful to talk to,
incredibly interesting, but for you
personally like what changed? Right.
Yeah, there's some things I learned. I
think I could have done a
if I had maybe allocated more time
especially after the interview to like
let's write up 2,000 words on everything
I learned and how it connects to the
things I know or something. Um and maybe
that's thing worth doing is spreading
out the episodes more and spending more
time afterwards consolidating.
Um
But yeah, I think the
I would pay basically infinite amounts
of money if there was somebody who was
really good at coming up with here is
here's the curriculum and here is the
practice problems you need to do and
here's the exercises you do after the
interview to clamp what you have
learned. Have you tried doing that with
somebody?
It's hard to find some I mean I maybe I
haven't tried super hard, but um
it seems actually it seems like it'd be
tough to find somebody who could do that
for every single
kind of discipline. Maybe I should just
hire different ones for different
topics. Maybe or there's something about
like I mean what problem
you know, are you solving sort of for
each episode? And I mean as far as I can
tell like that's the only way I really
understand anything is that you know, I
I get interested in something. At first
I don't even have a problem, but there's
just some sense of there's some
contribution to make here and gradually
you home in and
there's a problem and then you I mean
funnily enough I mean spending time
stuck is incredibly important. Um and
and I sort of
you know, I that used to just be
annoying. Now it seems like oh, this is
actually um uh uh maybe even the most
important part of the whole process. Um
but that very hard wonness of it means
that you know, I internalize it
afterwards. I often find actually if I
you know, I've written sometimes 10,000
word essays in you know, a couple of
days and I've written them in you know,
3 months or 6 months. Uh I I feel like I
did I I didn't learn very much from the
ones that that that only took a couple
of days. Uh whereas I you know, there's
some of the ones that that that took 3
months, I'll be you know, 15 years later
I'll I'll I'll I'll still remember.
>> Yeah, can you describe outside of um
physics
how you learn
of the one that took I mean 3 months.
>> I mean by far the most you know, yeah,
the the the common things. There's
always some creative artifact. Sometimes
it's a class.
Uh you know, sometimes it's engagement
with a group of people who um you know,
there's some collective creative
artifact that you're you're you're
working on together. I mean you you
might not even be aware of it, but you
you you're acting as an input to their
creative ends
in some way.
And sometimes it's just you know, it's
an essay or a book or or whatever. Yeah.
Um you know, it's one of the reasons why
often quite enjoy doing podcasts. I mean
particularly I mean I you know, I I I
said yes to come here partially because
I know you you ask unusually demanding
questions.
And so it's sort of that's an attempt to
to to get this sort of perspective from
a different it's a different kind of a
forcing function. Um so yeah, trying to
pick sort of the most demanding creative
context. Yeah, so for this interview I
went through like three lectures of the
Susskind special relativity. The problem
is that there's almost no practice
problems in it. And so I hired um a
physicist friend who's going to like I
haven't done it yet, but
it's like every lecture I want like a
bunch of practice problems to go through
them and I'm I'm planning on being
>> [snorts]
>> um a
a a properly humbled.
>> How do you how do you make it as jugular
as possible, right? Like
>> Mhm. the higher you can raise the
stakes, the better.
I mean the interview is in some sense
high stakes, but also it doesn't
necessarily test deep understanding.
Yeah, but I don't think the interview is
that high stakes, right? You're not
writing a book about special relativity.
And you're not trying to write a book
that replaces the current you know, what
whatever the the existing standard
textbook is. Like that that's a really
high Yeah. really high thing. One of the
a phrase that I sort of
find particularly difficult and and um
it's it's funny when people will talk
about going deep on a subject. And it
turns out, you know, different people
have different ideas of what this means.
Some people means they read a couple of
blog posts. Some people it means they
read a book about it. Some people it
means they wrote a book about it. Um and
and and and I think like it's sort of
what what what what your standard is.
The sort of the standard you hold
yourselves to um determines a lot about,
you know, your ability to to integrate
knowledge in this way.
I don't know what your experience has
been, but I found that
I'm getting I'm in some sense
it was a move much faster on some things
through the help of AI, but I don't know
if I'm like learning better. Yeah. And I
think it's probably because the hardest
thing, the thing that is most demanding,
is so aversive that you try to take any
excuse you can to get out of it. And
just having back-and-forth conversations
that allow me where where you gloss over
It's entertaining, but not necessarily
anything else.
>> Yeah, so it's such an easy way to get
out of the thing. Yeah. Um in fact, it
makes it easier because instead of doing
some intermediate thinking, you there's
always a next question you can ask a
chatbot. Yeah. And and and it's somewhat
valuable. Like it's not I mean, that's
part of the seductiveness, of course.
Like like it's not actually it's not
actually useless. Um but um but yeah, it
can sort of substitute for for actually
doing the thing that that maybe you
should be doing. Um
It's interesting that, like the the the
extent to which
you know, to what extent should you be
outsourcing that kind of stuff uh and to
what extent do do you know, like like
it's it's really there's some sort of
interesting judgment call about uh uh
you know,
you actually there is a whole bunch of
routine work that that you want done.
Um and in fact, it's it's low value for
you, so you may as well get uh if you
can get a chatbot to do it, you may as
well. So, uh somebody interviewed
the pioneering computer scientist Alan
Kay years ago and he was asked what he
thought about um basically Linux and if
I remember his answer correctly, he
basically said, "Look, you know,
it doesn't have anything to do with
computer science. It's just a great big
ball of mud. Um there's a few
interesting ideas in there which are
which are worth understanding, but
mostly your all your learning is stuff
about Linux. Like like you're not
actually learning anything which is
transferable." I thought that was a like
very like that there's a certain kind of
seductiveness
uh
to some things where you know, it's sort
of a Rube Goldberg machine. You can just
sort of learn about all the bits and it
feels kind of entertaining, um but if
you step back and think about the
question, you know, what am I actually
doing here? Um
it might not actually be meeting your
objectives. Maybe you want to become a
you know, a sysadmin and learning Linux
is a great use of your time. There's
uh no no harm in that at all, but if if
your answer is if you if your objective
is to understand the fundamentals of
computing, uh it's much less much less
clear that that's a good use of your
time. I thought that was uh it was
certainly an an answer I've I've thought
a lot about where you
you actually need to you that for a
certain type of mind, there is a
seductiveness in in just just learning
systems and confusing that with with
with understanding. Yeah. All right,
I'll keep you updated on how this goes.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I I I I owe you a text
within a month of
some revamped learning system. Yeah.
I'll be really curious if you I mean,
and then it's also true, right? Like
tiny incremental improvements in this, I
mean, they're just worth so much.
>> It's sort of the main input into the
podcast, you know. It's great that the
bookshelves are fancy and I've got a
blackboard or whatever, but really like
the thing that makes the podcast better
is if I can improve the learning I do.
So, it's um
Yeah, it's it's worth every morsel of
improvement. Mhm. Yeah. Um all right,
thanks for the thanks for the therapy
session. Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> Great note to end on.
Um
Thanks, Michael. All right, thanks for
talking.